rm: linux: add linux-nfs-boot information (#646)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/linux/linux-nfs-boot.rst

.. _howto-linux-nfs-boot:

> LmP root file-system over NFS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LmP Root File-System Over NFS
```

=============================

Introduction

> ------------
> LmP uses OSTree to pack the device root filesystem. In early boot,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------

LmP uses OSTree to pack the device root filesystem. In early boot,
```

initramfs manipulates OSTree storage to layout the target root

> filesystem for Linux kernel mounting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filesystem for Linux® kernel mounting.
```

Yocto enables modular initramfs configuration, allowing selective
support for udev, rootfs, ostree, or network filesystem in the
ramdisk. Adding NFS and OSTree ramdisk support permits switch root
scripts to prepare shared network filesystem for mounting on the target.

Generally, NFS booting any LmP system requires configuring NFS support
in the ramdisk, along with a TFTP server and an NFS server.

> NFS use case: validation of eMMC card

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NFS Use Case: Validation of eMMC Card
```

> -------------------------------------
> During product development, validating the eMMC card for system boot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-------------------------------------

During product development, validating the eMMC card for system boot
```

might be needed. The Linux kernel eMMC subsystem offers an extensive set
of tests. Unfortunately, many tests require unbinding the eMMC card from
the kernel. In such cases, you can boot the system over NFS, unbind the
eMMC, and run the tests. Here's an example executing eMMC tuning tests:

.. prompt:: text

      $ echo 'mmc0:0001' >  /sys/bus/mmc/drivers/mmcblk/unbind
      $ echo 'mmc0:0001' > /sys/bus/mmc/drivers/mmc_test/bind
      $ echo 52 > /sys/kernel/debug/mmc0/mmc0\:0001/test

> Enabling NFS support on initramfs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling NFS Support on initramfs
```

> ---------------------------------
> To configure the ramdisk for NFS boot using Yocto requires enabling the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---------------------------------

To configure the ramdisk for NFS boot using Yocto requires enabling the
```

``initramfs-module-nfsrootfs`` package.

A reference snippet can be seen below:

.. prompt:: text

     diff --git a/meta-lmp-base/recipes-core/images/initramfs-ostree-lmp-image.bb b/meta-lmp-base/recipes-core/images/initramfs-ostree-lmp-image.bb
     index f4f2e505..99b801ca 100644
     --- a/meta-lmp-base/recipes-core/images/initramfs-ostree-lmp-image.bb
     +++ b/meta-lmp-base/recipes-core/images/initramfs-ostree-lmp-image.bb
     @@ -4,6 +4,7 @@ PACKAGE_INSTALL = "initramfs-framework-base \
     initramfs-module-udev \
     initramfs-module-rootfs \
     initramfs-module-ostree \
     + initramfs-module-nfsrootfs \
     initramfs-module-ostree-factory-reset \
     ${VIRTUAL-RUNTIME_base-utils} \
     ${@bb.utils.contains('DISTRO_FEATURES', 'ima', 'initramfs-framework-ima', '', d)} \

Then rebuild LmP as usual.

Access to the LmP released WIC file, the kernel Image for booting, the
board's device tree blob, and the generated ramdisk is necessary for the
following sections.

> Preparing the NFS server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preparing the NFS Server
```

> ------------------------
> Copy the WIC image created during the build step to the NFS shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------------------

Copy the WIC image created during the build step to the NFS shared
```

folder and mount it for simplicity. Alternatively, you can extract and
copy all its contents based on your use case.

> To mount the WIC, use the fdisk utility to determine the start sector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mount the WIC, use ``fdisk`` to determine the start sector
```

and length of the rootfs image in the file (i.e., the number of
sectors).

.. prompt:: text

    $ fdisk -l lmp-base-console-image-${platform-name}.wic

Then create the ``rootfs`` directory and mount it:

.. prompt:: text

    #!/bin/bash
    mkdir rootfs
    read -p "Enter linux start sector: " lsector
    read -p "Enter linux number of sectors: " lnsectors
    let "offset=`expr ${lsector}*512`"
    let "sizelimit=`expr ${lnsectors}*512`"
    mount -o loop,offset=$offset,sizelimit=$sizelimit -tauto lmp-base-console-image.wic rootfs/

It is this ``rootfs`` mount-point - which shall contain ``boot/`` and ``ostree/``
directories - what you should export via NFS.

Inspecting the ``ostree/`` directory and in this particular case, you should
expect something as follows:

.. prompt:: text

    ostree/boot.1/lmp/180c0adc612a144a262f15e6c124cc3ac22260b7b2897832a1228da2d3e359a5/0

> Preparing the TFTP server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preparing the TFTP Server
```

> -------------------------
> LmP employs U-boot as both the primary and secondary bootloader on ARM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-------------------------

LmP employs U-boot as both the primary and secondary bootloader on ARM
```

And to extract the device tree blob (position 1 in the FIT) to a file named ``system.dtb``:

.. prompt:: text

    $ dumpimage -T flat_dt -p 1 -o system.dtb fitImage-uz3cg-dwg-sec.bin
    Extracted:
     Image 1 (fdt-system-top.dtb)
      Description:  Flattened Device Tree blob
      Created:      Thu Sep  1 04:40:19 2022
      Type:         Flat Device Tree
      Compression:  uncompressed
      Data Size:    45983 Bytes = 44.91 KiB = 0.04 MiB
      Architecture: AArch64
      Load Address: 0x40000000
      Hash algo:    sha256
      Hash value:   5270804486f9aeed060da21a2879ce21c60b5cb45ffef7b35b1fac3171c6ee81

The ramdisk is deployed as
``initramfs-ostree-lmp-image-${platform-name}.cpio.gz``. In order for
U-boot to consume it we need to convert the archive to a ramdisk
image. For that, U-boot provides the mkimage Linux utility.

Run the following command to generate the ``ramdisk`` file:

.. prompt:: text

    $ mkimage -A arm -O linux -T ramdisk -d initramfs-ostree-lmp-image-uz3cg-dwg-sec.cpio.gz ramdisk

At this point, we have all the components to boot over NFS. The TFTP
server shall export ``Image``, ``system.dtb`` and ``ramdisk``.

> Using U-boot to boot the NFS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using U-boot to Boot the NFS
```

> -----------------------------
> For the first boot you will have to flash the WIC image as per the LmP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----------------------------

For the first boot you will have to flash the WIC image as per the LmP
```

.. _howto-linux-nfs-boot:

LmP Root File-System Over NFS
=============================

Introduction
------------

LmP uses OSTree to pack the device root filesystem. In early boot,
initramfs manipulates OSTree storage to layout the target root
filesystem for Linux® kernel mounting.

> Yocto enables modular initramfs configuration, allowing selective
> support for udev, rootfs, ostree, or network filesystem in the
> ramdisk. Adding NFS and OSTree ramdisk support permits switch root
> scripts to prepare shared network filesystem for mounting on the target.

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to understand the goal of this sentence.

Would this order be ok?

```suggestion
Adding NFS and OSTree ramdisk support permits switch root
scripts to prepare shared network filesystem for mounting on the target
because there are modular initramfs configuration, allowing selective
support for udev, rootfs, ostree, or network filesystem in the
ramdisk. 
```
Why is it important to mention that "Adding NFS and OSTree ramdisk support permits switch root
scripts to prepare shared network filesystem for mounting on the target."? It looks loose to me...

But if you want to mention this, use The Yocto Project instead of yocto

Author: I thought it wss important to mention  just because I didnt know about it :) but it could very well be that is common knowledge and it is just me that wasnt aware of it...but yeah, I'd rather keep it.

Generally, NFS booting any LmP system requires configuring NFS support

> in the ramdisk, along with a TFTP server and an NFS server.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be the first sentence in this intruduction.

Author: you are right!

NFS Use Case: Validation of eMMC Card
-------------------------------------

During product development, validating the eMMC card for system boot
might be needed. The Linux kernel eMMC subsystem offers an extensive set
of tests. Unfortunately, many tests require unbinding the eMMC card from
the kernel. In such cases, you can boot the system over NFS, unbind the
eMMC, and run the tests. Here's an example executing eMMC tuning tests:

.. prompt:: text

      $ echo 'mmc0:0001' >  /sys/bus/mmc/drivers/mmcblk/unbind
      $ echo 'mmc0:0001' > /sys/bus/mmc/drivers/mmc_test/bind
      $ echo 52 > /sys/kernel/debug/mmc0/mmc0\:0001/test

Enabling NFS Support on initramfs
---------------------------------

> To configure the ramdisk for NFS boot using Yocto requires enabling the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure the ramdisk for NFS boot using LmP requires enabling the
```

Author: Lmp uses Yocto and Yocto uses the module. I'd rather point to the last element in the chain (ie Yocto)

Reviewer 2: in this case, use "the Yocto Project" instead of only yocto

``initramfs-module-nfsrootfs`` package.

A reference snippet can be seen below:

.. prompt:: text

>      diff --git a/meta-lmp-base/recipes-core/images/initramfs-ostree-lmp-image.bb b/meta-lmp-base/recipes-core/images/initramfs-ostree-lmp-image.bb

Reviewer 2: this is not supposed to be built on a factory?

Author: ah yes, but it is not enabled by default so someone will have to take action in their override...should I provide a meta-subscriber-override patch instead?

Reviewer 2: The main point here is what is needed to make the NFS work is only available via local build?

One argument to keep the local build only is to make sure people will not start using NFS for things other than testing/dev

Author: I think we should cover both cases.I'll add the subscribers patch as well
